[SOFT AMBIENT MUSIC]
>> Hi.
It's James here
from Food Matters,
and today I'm speaking with
Vishen Lakhiani, the founder
of Mindvalley and someone who is
deeply committed and concerned
to pushing humanity
forward and shifting
the shape of consciousness
on planet Earth,
and also the future
of education.
We're going to be touching
on a few topics today,
and I'm excited to chat.
Hey, Vishen.
How are you doing?
>> Hi, James.
>> So we live in a Western,
educated, industrialized, rich,
and democratic society.
We make up about 10% to 12%
of the global population,
and yet we seem to have
figured certain things out
but completely failed
at other things.
How have we ended up so
unhappy, depressed, anxious,
and really struggling with
this modern culturescape,
as you call it, that we live in?
>> Well, I think it's really
part of the growth process,
right?
So the first thing
to understand is
that all of us, whether you
live in the Western world or you
live in a very traditional
society like in India
or in China, we are all
like fish swimming in water.
A fish swimming in water cannot
see and has no idea that it is
in water because it is
so immersed in water.
Likewise, when we
live in this world,
we are immersed in the
culturescape-- a tangled web
of rituals, beliefs,
ideologies, dogma,
ideas spread from generation
to generation to generation.
But we don't know that all of
this exists solely in our head.
Ken Wilbur says that there
are two types of reality.
There is absolute truth.
Absolute truth is
this rock is hard,
and if I hit you on the
head with this rock,
it's going to hurt.
Every society, every
culture can agree to that.
And then there's relative truth.
And relative truth is the ideas
that we have individually,
culture by culture by
culture, on love, marriage,
relationship, the definition
of ideas like success,
career, the 9:00 to 5:00, our
ideas of God or what is right
or what is wrong or morality.
And so a lot of the stuff
that's stressing us out
is stuff that doesn't
actually exist.
It doesn't exist.
It simply exists
in our own heads
in this realm of relative truth
because we are conditioned
to believe that it is so.
So let me give you an example.
I recently got
divorced, and it was
one of the most beautiful,
amazing, conscious experiences.
My wife and I, we were
together for 19 years.
And we decided to do a
conscious uncoupling.
And what that
meant is we decided
to end our idea of
foreverness, but do it
in the most conscious way where
we stayed friends and business
partners and co-parents.
But we were the tiny
fraction of people
who actually went
through a divorce
and had an incredible time.
In fact, after our divorce,
we took an eight-day holiday
together.
But most people when they go
through a divorce, it's pain.
It's agony because
the culturescape,
the collective ideology
of what is real,
has conditioned them to
believe that love is forever,
that when you marry someone,
you stay with them forever,
till death do you part.
And when it comes
time for that to end,
it is an unmitigated disaster.
And you should be
ashamed, and you
should fight that other person
for whatever you built up
together.
So you see, the culturescape
is filled with outdated dogma
and ideology.
I call these rules
our bullshit rules.
We are living within
the context of rules.
They are rules that
serve us-- don't jump off
a tall building-- and they
are rules that hold us back.
The cause of all our
stress, all our anxiety,
all our fear in
the Western world
is because as we built up this
vast culturescape that moves us
forward, we are also
getting ourselves tangled up
in this web of rules.
>> Profound message
there for humanity.
And I think one of the
things you are doing
is trying to test those
rules in your actions,
in your life which is fantastic.
It's fun to follow.
One of the deeply
entrenched systems
we have in our modern world
is this idea of education.
And from the day
we're born, we're
sort of pushed into
this system that people
say has been designed--
either it's by design or
whether it's an accident
or it's an Industrial Era thing.
What are your thoughts on the
founding ideas and intentions
of the education
system, and where do you
think its biggest
failings are currently?
>> So my views on the
education system--
the education system is one
of those elements of society
that just hasn't evolved
as rapidly as it should.
You see, according to Ray
Kurzweil, the VP of technology
of Google, by 2029, all
of us within our pockets
will have our own personalized
artificial intelligence.
If you've watched
Marvel's "Avengers,"
Iron Man has his AI, Jarvis,
that runs his entire life.
All of us are about to
get our own personalized
Jarvis within the next decade.
This is also going to
be true for our kids.
This is also going to be true
for kids in the developing
world because the cost of
smartphones and tablets
is going to drop to $10 apiece.
What this means
is that all of us
are going to have
a backup brain.
Suchitra Mitra, who won the
TED Prize for Education--
I once heard him
speak, and he said
the way we educate our
kids is ridiculous.
So someone asked, what do
we need to stop teaching?
And he said, stop
teaching spelling.
Stop teaching math
because our kids
are going to have a backup
brain that can already do that.
Why are we teaching them skills
that were needed in 1970?
So then the question is,
what do we teach our kids?
Well, we teach our
kids transformation.
There is a difference between
learning and transformation.
Learning is facts and figures.
Learning is stuff that
you easily forget,
but transformation is different.
Transformation is
beyond learning.
Transformation is an
expansion of your worldview.
And a mind, once
expanded, can never again
shrink to its original size.
And once your worldview changes
where you become more authentic
or you become more
empathetic and kind
or you become more compassionate
or you become more autonomous,
you never lose that sense.
Now, philosophers and
anthropologists and professors
who study transformation
say that transformation
in the world today
comes from two things.
The first is the
disorienting dilemma.
It is the setback,
the suffering,
the thing that pounds you
and knocks you off course.
But when you bounce back
from that bankruptcy
or from that broken heart
or from that divorce
or from that bout in
hospital, you are wiser,
and you see the world
in a different way.
And you know what you need to
do next to avoid that setback.
Google did a study.
This was cited in Salim
Ismail's fantastic book,
"Exponential Organizations."
Google found that its
best people were not,
contrary to popular
belief, STEM graduates--
Science, Technology,
Engineering, Math--
but young people who had
gone through suffering
and had emerged from
that suffering humbler,
kinder, more compassionate.
Those were the best people.
Now, transformation
comes from suffering,
but it also comes from a gradual
expansion of meaning schema.
This gradual expanding
of meaning schema
is when we learn from mentors,
when we travel the world, when
we're introduced to people
who have figured it out,
and they are willing to
help us figure it out,
when we wisen up.
The point of education has to
be to speed up the accumulation
of meaning schema--
in short, to speed up wisdom,
to speed up transformation
so that the human
machine doesn't
have to go through suffering.
And when we do go
through suffering,
we know how to sail past
it and see it as a lesson.
So the problem
with our education
is it isn't paying enough
attention to helping people
transform by teaching them new
definitions of relationships,
new definitions of
love, by teaching them
that the dogma of
organized religion
can often create
pain and setback,
and to teach them new
models of spirituality,
to teach them creativity, to
teach them entrepreneurship,
to teach them that
love doesn't have
to come from outside forces.
It can be generated within.
That you are enough as
you are, no matter what
your parents or your teacher
or your preacher or the media
says.
There are so many different
components of transformation
that we can serve up to
our children, yet we don't.
We teach people
biology, but we do not
teach them how to
extend their lifespans
and exist in a healthy way.
We teach people morality,
but we don't teach them
how to truly be
compassionate and empathize
with other human beings.
We teach people to sing
the national anthem,
but we don't teach them
that in today's world,
we are citizens of
Spaceship Earth,
and we need to join
hands across borders.
We teach people accounting,
but we don't teach them
how to be an
entrepreneur and how
to deal with the
setbacks and the failure
that you might face when
you go on that journey.
So modern education is
defunct because it's
training people for an age
before the backup brain.
>> This is really profound.
One thing I want to touch on,
and I think we're segueing
into-- and I think you covered
education really well there--
is we're not teaching
our children how
to transform, to love, to
connect, to be empathetic,
these critical skills
to master their biology.
But then how-- if somebody
is an adult, they're 45,
and now they're approaching this
idea that they're dealing with
trauma that they
were born into--
they're dealing with
maybe a narcissistic
or an abusive parent, or they're
dealing with physical trauma
when they were younger.
And so they've passed
through the education system.
They're old.
They're out of that system.
Of course they can re-educate
and look at programs
you're doing, but how do we deal
with these emotional traumas,
circling in on this one
particular vertical?
Because I think this is one
of the biggest challenges
of our time.
We've all suffered some
form of conditional love,
or we've all suffered
some form of trauma,
and yet we reach our
40s or 50s, and we're
trying to deal with
that as an adult.
How do we become aware
of that, and how do we
heal some of those problems?
>> So all of us face certain
trauma, sufferings, setback.
How do we become aware
of that and heal that?
That is the essence
of transformation.
It's when you're able
to expand your worldview
to see the cause of this trauma,
the cause of this suffering,
and move beyond it.
Victor Frankl in "Man's
Search for Meaning"
said "when meaning is
given to suffering,
it ceases to become suffering."
One of the greatest
things that we
can grow into as we get
older is the ability
to look back at the suffering,
the trauma, the pain
that we went
through, and see how,
within these moments of
pain, there were lessons
to be learned, and how this pain
made us stronger, more whole,
more complete individuals.
One of the root causes
of transformation
is a concept called a
disorienting dilemma,
which means that a
pain that is horrible--
it's something that shakes
you, but through that, you
become a better person.
Now, I like to
look back at pain.
I like to look back at suffering
and see how, from that moment,
there was an insight
or a new idea
or a new sense of
myself that emerged.
The Rumi said, "the wound
is the part through which
the light enters."
And the Rumi also said, "all
ye who cannot take a good rub,
how will you ever
become a polished gem?"
And so when we look
back at suffering
and see how it made us
whole, it gave us lessons,
it ceases to become suffering.
And this is one of
the greatest skills
that a human being can learn.
There is a light on the
other end of suffering.
So I like to look back
at moments of pain.
And when I'm about to
enter a moment of pain,
whether it's a
project that failed
or a person who treated me
unkindly, I ask myself, wow,
this is kind of exciting.
I wonder what I'm going
to learn from that.
>> Great question to ask.
I mean, I was taught everything
is absolutely always unfolding
perfectly, which
trains you to see
the perfection in every moment.
And it's a fast track
to transformation.
A lot of our failings get
brought up in parenting.
And many people are not aware
of their subconscious behavior
until they have a child
that they're parenting,
and then they witness themselves
behaving in ways that they
maybe shouldn't.
You've worked with Shefali
and a few others, who--
I adore her work.
I think she's going to help
heal the next generation
and maybe cut some of the
servers that are holding us
back from evolving.
What's your thoughts on this
parenting dilemma in that you
are finding your
failings as a new parent,
and how can we evolve
our style of parenting
to serve the needs of
the next generation
and truly move forward in
a fashion that we need to?
>> So my advice on parenting
might be counterintuitive.
And I want to bring in ideas
from different philosophers
and parenting
experts whom I've had
the pleasure of learning from.
First, the first
rule of parenting
comes from Shelly Lefkoe.
And Shelly said, your
only job as a parent
is to keep your children safe.
That's it.
It's to keep your
children safe--
to teach them how to cross
the street, to teach them
how to protect themselves.
That's your only job.
Shefali Tsabary provides
the second rule.
And the second rule is, when
you become a parent, that
is the universe giving
you the ultimate textbook
to help you grow yourself.
Parenting is not about
you evolving your kids.
They're going to be fine.
They are their own
individual souls.
Parenting is about
you growing yourself.
Your kids are going to teach
you so much more about life
than what you would
initially think.
And so you want to let
your kids be who they are.
Do not impose your
beliefs on your children.
Your job as a parent is
to keep your children
free of your own bullshit.
Do not impose your
religion on your children.
Let them decide how they
will want to view God.
Do not suggest to them that
they need to come home with A's.
Let them decide if they
want it themselves.
Your job, according to
Shefali and according
to Shelly Lefkoe, two of
the greatest parenting
minds out there, is to
make sure that you do not
infect your children
with your beliefs,
but to let them form
their own beliefs
and to ensure that those
beliefs are healthy.
Now, one of the things we
have to recognize as parents
is that every little
thing we do is going
to cause our children to take
on some belief or the other,
just like every little
thing our parents did
imposed a belief onto us.
So I was once in a
car with my child.
And Hayden, my son,
asked me a question,
and the question was
something on science.
And just as I was
about to answer him,
my phone rang,
and it was my CFO.
And I know that if my CFO
calls me on a weekend,
something has gone
wrong in the business,
and I have to take the call.
So I picked up the call.
And as soon as I put
the phone to my ear,
I realized something.
By asking Hayden a question
and then picking up the phone
and putting it to my ear, there
is a good, probable chance
that I'm going to infect
Hayden's meaning-making machine
with the following
thought pattern.
My dad cares about work
more than he cares about me.
Therefore, I am
not as significant.
I could not take that risk.
So while having my CFO on the
phone, I asked him to hold.
And I turned to
Hayden, and I explained
to him what was going on.
Specifically, I said this.
Hayden, I really want
to answer your question,
but my CFO just called.
Something may have broken.
Let me quickly deal with
this because my priority
today on this Sunday
is to be with you.
So give me one
minute, and then we're
going to go deep
into your question.
That simple thing
helps Hayden preserve
his meaning-making machine.
It prevents him from taking on
any type of unconscious belief
that he is less important to
his father than his father's
company.
And that really is one
of the ultimate skills
you want to learn as a parent.
Rule number one is
that your only job
is to keep your kids safe.
Rule number two-- do not
impose your beliefs on the kid.
Rule number three, which
comes from rule number one--
keep your kids safe
from damaging beliefs
that they might take on
based on your behavior.
>> Brilliant.
Well summarized.
I am enjoying your journey into
exploring this idea of uniting
humanity under one flag.
Do you think it's
going to take all of us
to take a trip to
Mars or outer space
to realize that we are just, as
you say, meat bodies hurdling
on this rock through space?
Or do you think that
we are rocketing
towards this sort of unified
consciousness, this unified
group of people on one planet?
Because it seems that it's
going either way in the media,
and I want to know
your opinion about how
we can bring people together
and raise consciousness
on planet Earth.
>> Great.
So let's talk
about unity, right?
So I want to be very,
very, very firm.
My belief is that
we need to move
beyond the idea of nations.
Humanity needs to
unite in the way
that the European Union has
become a union of nations.
Now, this does not
mean free borders
so that borders disappear.
Even within the EU,
there were various rules
that decided when
a nation would get
to join this body called the
EU, and a nation like Britain
can choose to exit.
However, what is
going to happen,
and what has happened with
organizations like the EU,
is that it prevents war.
It prevents petty politics.
It gets people to
see that we have
more in common with the
people across our border
than we think.
And this is a beautiful
way to view humanity.
The only way we can solve the
big global issues of our time
is to solve it as
a unified species.
When men colonizes
Mars, the flag
that should be on that
rocketship going to Mars
should not be the
United States flag.
And I know this is going
to piss off people.
It should be the Earth flag.
Because the only
way we are going
to be able to become a species
that spans the milky ways
is unified as earthlings.
And so one of my quests
is to move humanity
towards greater unity
under an Earth flag.
An Earth flag is not the
flag of the United Nations.
The United Nations
is a governing body.
The Earth flag has to be a
symbol with no power of its own
except the power we give it.
And so I'm working
on a 20-year project
to create a flag for
collective humanity.
Now, why is this important?
Nationalism is one of the most
dangerous forces on the planet
today.
We have seen how ideas
such as nationalism
have cost nations like
Britain to shoot themselves
in the foot, nations like
America to embrace Trumpism.
Otto Scharmer from MIT
suggests that politics today
is not about left or right.
It's about being
closed or unity.
It is about shutting yourself
and burying your head
in the sand and saying, la, la,
la, la, global warming isn't
real, let's build a border
wall and shut out the Mexicans.
Or it's about unity, which means
saying that we as a species
have to look out
for each other, need
to take care of our
planet, and need
to ensure that our world is
good multiple generations down.
I don't care about
the views of the left
or the right of the
political spectrum.
But what I do care is that
nationalism and this idea
of closing ourselves in and
that our religion, our race,
or ethnicity, our nation
is better than others,
that is a very dangerous idea.
And we need to inoculate the
human species against that.
Human beings are
very programmable.
They can be programmed
towards ideas
that unify them and
create more compassion
and love in the world.
But they can also be
programmed for ideas
that create disunity and hate.
The question is, where
is the human race going,
and what do we want to bet on?
And I believe that we are moving
more and more towards unity.
And if you look at issues
like global warming,
no country on its own can
prevent global warming.
The only way to do it is to
do it as a collective species.
No country on its
own can prevent wars.
The only way to do it is to do
it as a unified human species.
And I think this
is where we need
to move towards as a species.
The idea of the
Earth flag is to show
people, is to remind people that
they do not belong to a nation.
They were born in a
nation in this lifetime,
but their greater belonging is
with a collective human race,
is with planet Earth.
And I believe once people
see this symbology--
and you do not need to be in
space looking down on the Earth
to be reminded of this.
The memetic idea
of an Earth flag
already creates a
form of inoculation
against nationalism.
This is what we are
striving towards.
>> Awesome, Vishen.
And I'll be with
you cheering on.
One more question.
I am onboard with everything
you're talking about.
However, some
people, they're going
to focus on the
personal transformation
and do that work.
But there's a greater,
bigger mission at play here.
And as a species,
we voted out-- or as
a modern, domesticated species,
we voted out feudalism.
We voted out dictatorships.
We voted out
communism, and we voted
in this liberal, democratic
capitalistic system,
good and bad.
There are some great
spectrums of that.
And I believe
conscious businesses--
Mindvalley, private entities and
even public entities-- or you
think about TOMS Shoes.
People who have moved beyond
just helping the people
in their organization,
helping the planet,
but having a purpose,
a bigger purpose
have the capability to make
the most radical changes.
Because if we shift
our consumption habits,
we're able to shift and
affect fast global change
as opposed to relying
on governments.
Do you believe in this
ideology, and do you
believe it will be
conscious business
and conscious entrepreneurs
and the consumers that
support those businesses that
are able to push humanity
forward faster?
>> I believe conscious
business is the way forward,
but it's not just about
conscious business.
We have to look at consciousness
from different perspectives.
Now, I look at it this way.
We need to bring conscious
practices into our education
system so we educate
the next generation.
Well, we need to bring
conscious business forward.
And conscious business really
means that it's not just
about profit and loss.
It's about serving
the human species
multiple generations down.
And then we have to look
at conscious selves,
about people
learning to take care
of their body and themselves.
And we need to look at
conscious relationships.
And this means
conscious families,
conscious partnerships,
the way companies work
with their employees,
and vise versa,
the way governments work with
its people, and vise versa.
And finally, on
top of all of this,
we need to look at
conscious citizenry
and conscious relationships
between human beings
and the ecology.
When you put all
of this together,
I think we have a
pretty good path
towards improving the
conditions in planet Earth--
not just now, but for
multiple generations down.
>> Thank you, Vishen.
It's always a pleasure.
I love getting a download
from you every now and then
and helping take
that to people that
might be needing it in times
of suffering or looking
for insight.
And I appreciate your time.
[SOFT AMBIENT MUSIC]